*This activity has been created as part of the 42 curriculum by falves-e, afranco-.*

# Push_swap

This project revolves around sorting an arbitrary number of integers.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Description](#description)
- [How It Works](#how-it-works)
- [Instructions](#instructions)
- [Resources](#resources)

---

## Description

The project introduces several new concepts, including:

- Stack data structure
- Sorting algorithms
- Team work
- Bigger Project scale

The intent behind this project is, not only to introduce the concept of sorting algorithms, but also to teach how to work as a team, and working on a larger scaled project.

The parser, adaptive algorithm, the medium aglorithm and bench management were made by falves-e.
The stack implementation, simple and medium aglorithms were made by afranco-.

---

## How It Works

The program reads the input and checks if there are any flags that will affect the behaviour program. Then reads every argument given in search for any conflict. If it passes, it will proceed to one of the agorithms implemented.

Each of the algorithms implemented are optimized towards the level of disorder. The performance may be afected if forcefully used.

The implementation follows these steps:

1. Custom adapted parser
2. Disorder check
3. Algorithm that adapts to disorder measured 
4. Prints operations made


---

Those algorythms are, from small level of disorder to highest level of disorder:

### Insertion Sort

This algorithm takes the element on top of the stack and swaps iteratively unitl it reaches the correct position.

---

### Bucket Sort

This algorithm divide the stack into √n buckets, and push them to another stack, still disordered. Then pushes back to the initial stack, ordered.

---

### Merge Sort

This algorithm divides the stack, recursively, enough times that it ends up with a buffer of 1 integer. Then, rejoins the peices sorted.

---
## Adaptive Strategy

The adaptive mode measures the disorder of the input by computing the ratio of inversions to total possible pairs.

- Low disorder → Insertion Sort
- Medium disorder → Bucket Sort
- High disorder → Merge Sort

This allows the program to select the most suitable algorithm automatically.

---

### Operations

| NAME | WHAT IT DOES 												|
|------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| `sa` | swaps the first 2 elements of stack_a					|
| `sb` | swaps the first 2 elements of stack_b					|
| `ss` | swaps the first 2 elements of both stacks				|
| `pa` | pushed the first element of stack_b to the top of stack_a	|
| `pb` | pushed the first element of stack_a to the top of stack_b	|
| `ra` | rotates the first element of the stack_a to the bottom		|
| `rb` | rotates the first element of the stack_b to the bottom		|
| `rr` | rotates the first element of each stack to the bottom		|
| `rra`| rotates the last element of the stack_a to the top			|
| `rrb`| rotates the last element of the stack_b to the top			|
| `rrr`| rotates the last element of each stack to the top			|

---


## Instructions

Compile with:

```bash
make # creates the program at the root
```

inside the folder

### More Makefile comands

```bash
make clean	# removes *.o files
make fclean	# removes the program
make re		# runs fclean and rebuilds the project
```
Execute the program with the format:

```bash
./push_swap --<possible-flag-1> --<possible-flag-2> <arguments>
```

### Possible Flags
```bash
--simple	# forces simple algorithm
--medium	# forces medium algorithm
--complex	# forces complex algorithm
--adaptive	# forces adaptive algorithm
--bench		# prints benchmark to stderr containning operations
```
Example usage:

```bash
./push_swap --bench --medium 1 3 6 90 3298 -134 -33 -4
```

Output
```bash
ra
ra
ra
ra
ra
pb
pb
pb
ra
ra
ra
ra
ra
pb
pb
pb
ra
ra
ra
pb
pb
rb
pa
rrb
pa
pa
pa
pa
pa
pa
pa
[bench] disorder: 53.57%
[bench] strategy: Medium / O(n√n)
[bench] total_ops: 31
[bench] sa: 0 sb: 0 ss: 0 pa: 8 pb: 8
[bench] ra: 13 rb: 1 rr: 0 rra: 0 rrb: 1 rrr: 0
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If no flag is used, the default behaviour of the program is `--adaptive`

---


## Resources

### Documentation

* [Stack Data Structure (GeeksforGeeks)](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/stack-data-structure/)
* [Sorting Algorithms Visualized (VisuAlgo)](https://visualgo.net/en/sorting)

### Testing

* [Push Swap Visualizer by o-reo](https://github.com/o-reo/push_swap_visualizer)

### AI Usage

* AI tools were used to refine documentation structure and assist with technical research.
* Research sorting algorithm characteristics and complexity.
* This project does not include any code generated by AI.
